---
layout: post
title: Using Bootstrap CSS with Jekyll
category: tech
tags:
 - Jekyll
twitter_text: "Using #Bootstrap CSS with #Jekyll"
twitter_tags: getbootstrap,jekyllrb
disqus: true
description: >
 There are multiple ways to integrate Bootstrap with Jekyll. This article documents how I did it for my site which runs
 on Github pages (which means that I can't use Jekyll plugins) and only uses Bootstrap CSS.
updated: 2015-03-27
---

There are multiple ways to integrate [Bootstrap](http://getbootstrap.com/) with [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com/).
This article documents how I did it for my site which runs on [Github pages](https://pages.github.com/) (which means
that I have the constraint that I can't use Jekyll plugins) and only uses Bootstrap CSS.

Bootstrap CSS is written using [Less](http://lesscss.org/), but Jekyll has integrated support for
[Sass](http://sass-lang.com/). Fortunately, there is an [official Sass port of
Bootstrap](https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap-sass), and I'm using this for my site.

Here are the basic steps to integrate the Sass port into your Jekyll site:

1.  Download the archive for the latest version at <https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap-sass/tags>. Alternatively, clone
    the git repository and checkout the tag for the latest version.

2.  Copy the following files and directories from the archive to the
    [Sass directory](http://jekyllrb.com/docs/assets/#sassscss) of your Jekyll project (which is `_sass` unless you
    have configured a different directory in `_config.yml`):

    *   `assets/stylesheets/_bootstrap.scss`

    *   `assets/stylesheets/bootstrap`

3.  Create a basic stylesheet (e.g. `styles/site.scss`) as follows:

        ---
        ---
        
        @import "bootstrap";

    The two `---` lines at the beginning instruct Jekyll to process the file using Sass (resulting in a
    `styles/site.css` file) instead of copying it verbatim to the generated site. The `@import` directive will include
    `_sass/_bootstrap.scss`, which in turn includes all the Bootstrap CSS components (under `_sass/bootstrap`).

You can now start to customize Bootstrap. Here are a few things that you might want to consider:

*   The Bootstrap CSS can be customized using variables. These variables and their default values are defined in
    `_sass/bootstrap/_variables.scss`. I don't recommend to change this file because this would make upgrading to a
    new Bootstrap version more difficult. Instead you should override these variables in `styles/site.scss`, as shown
    in the following example:

        ---
        ---
        
        $font-size-base: 17px;
        $headings-font-weight: 600;
        $blockquote-font-size: $font-size-base;
        
        @import "bootstrap";

    If you plan to create additional stylesheets, chances are high that you want to reuse these variables. In that case
    it is better to define them in a separate file, e.g. `_sass/_variables.scss`:
    
        $font-size-base: 17px;
        $headings-font-weight: 600;
        $blockquote-font-size: $font-size-base;
        
        @import "bootstrap/variables";
    
    The purpose of the import at the end of the file is to ensure that all variables are defined, even the ones that are
    not explicitly overridden.
    
    Your `styles/site.scss` file should then look as follows:
    
        ---
        ---
        
        @import "variables";
        @import "bootstrap";
    
    Note that this will indirectly import `_sass/bootstrap/_variables.scss` twice (once via `_sass/_variables.scss` and
    once via `_sass/_bootstrap.scss`), but that is not an issue because that Sass file only sets variables that have not
    been defined before, which means that the second import will have no effect.
    
    With that in place, you can reuse the variables in other stylesheets:

        ---
        ---
        
        @import "variables";

        .tag-cloud span { 
          font-size: 0.7*$font-size-base;
          vertical-align: super
        }

*   The stylesheet generated by Sass will be quite large. To reduce its size you may want to enable compression by
    adding the following option to your `_config.yml` file:
    
        sass:
            style: :compressed

*   By importing `_sass/_bootstrap.scss`, you will include all the Bootstrap CSS components into the stylesheet.
    However, it is unlikely that you use all of them. You may want to further reduce the size of the resulting
    stylesheet by importing only the components you need, as in the following example:
    
        ---
        ---
        
        @import "variables";
        
        @import "bootstrap/mixins";
        @import "bootstrap/normalize";
        @import "bootstrap/print";
        @import "bootstrap/scaffolding";
        @import "bootstrap/type";
        @import "bootstrap/grid";
        @import "bootstrap/responsive-utilities";

## References

As noted in the introduction, there are many ways to integrate Bootstrap with Jekyll. Here is a selection of other
artiles and projects on that subject:

*   [Using Twitter Bootstrap with Jekyll](http://brizzled.clapper.org/blog/2012/03/05/using-twitter-bootstrap-with-jekyll/)
    (uses [Rake](https://github.com/ruby/rake))

*   [Jekyll-Bootstrap project](http://jekyllbootstrap.com/) (also uses Rake)

*   [My Jekyll Blog Setup with Bootstrap, SASS and Pygments](http://kvurd.com/blog/my-jekyll-blog-setup-bootstrap-sass-pygments/)
    (approach similar to what is described here, but the `.scss` file shown in the article is missing the `---` lines
    at the beginning)
